working--producing one work after another--right up to my dying day.
[Forcing himself to continue.] That is why I cannot get on with you any
longer, Maia--not with you alone.


MAIA.

[Quietly.] Does that mean, in plain language, that you have grown tired
of me?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Bursts forth.] Yes, that is what it means! I have grown
tired--intolerably tired and fretted and unstrung--in this life with
you! Now you know it. [Controlling himself.] These are hard, ugly words
I am using. I know that very well. And you are not at all to blame in
this matter;--that I willingly admit. It is simply and solely I myself,
who have once more undergone a revolution--[Half to himself]--and
awakening to my real life.


MAIA.

[Involuntarily folding her hands.] Why in all the world should we not
part then?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Looks at her in astonishment.] Should you be willing to?


MAIA.

[Shrugging her shoulders.] Oh yes--if there's nothing else for it,
then--


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Eagerly.] But there is something else for it. There is an alternative--


MAIA.

[Holding up her forefinger.] Now you are thinking of the pale lady
again!


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Yes, to tell the truth, I cannot help constantly thinking of her. Ever
since I met her again. [A step nearer her.] For now I will tell you a
secret, Maia.


MAIA.

Well?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Touching his own breast.] In here, you see--in here I have a little
bramah-locked casket. And in that casket all my sculptor's visions are
stored up. But when she disappeared and left no trace, the lock of
the casket snapped to. And she had the key--and she took it away with
her.--You, little Maia, you had no key; so all that the casket contains
must lie unused. And the years pass! And I have no means of getting at
the treasure.


MAIA.

[Trying to repress a subtle smile.] Then get her to open the casket for
you again--


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Not understanding.] Maia--?


MAIA. --for here she is, you see. And no doubt it's on account of this
casket that she has come.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

I have not said a single word to her on this subject!


MAIA.

[Looks innocently at him.] My dear Rubek--is it worth while to make all
this fuss and commotion about so simple a matter?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Do you think this matter is so absolutely simple?


MAIA.

Yes, certainly I think so. Do you attach yourself to whoever you most
require. [Nods to him.] I shall always manage to find a place for
myself.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Where do you mean?


MAIA.

[Unconcerned, evasively.] Well--I need only take myself off to the
villa, if it should be necessary. But it won't be; for in town--in all
that great house of ours--there must surely, with a little good will, be
room enough for three.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Uncertainly.] And do you think that would work in the long run?


MAIA.

[In a light tone.] Very well, then--if it won't work, it won't. It is no
good talking about it.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

And what shall we do then, Maia--if it does not work?


MAIA.

[Untroubled.] Then we two will simply get out of each other's way--part
entirely. I shall always find something new for myself, somewhere in the
world. Something free! Free! Free!--No need to be anxious about that,
Professor Rubek! [Suddenly points off to the right.] Look there! There
we have her.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Turning.] Where?


MAIA.

Out on the plain. Striding--like a marble stature. She is coming this
way.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Stands gazing with his hand over his eyes.] Does not she look like the
Resurrection incarnate? [To himself.] And her I could displace--and move
into the shade! Remodel her--. Fool that I was!


MAIA.

What do you mean by that?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Putting the question aside.] Nothing. Nothing that you would
understand.

    [IRENE advances from the right over the upland.  The children
       at their play have already caught sight of her and run to
       meet her.  She is now surrounded by them; some appear confident
       and at ease, others uneasy and timid.  She talks low to them
       and indicates that they are to go down to the hotel; she
       herself will rest a  little beside the brook.  The children
       run down over the slope to the left, half way to the back.
       IRENE goes up to the wall of rock, and lets the rillets of
       the cascade flow over her hands, cooling them.


MAIA.

[In a low voice.] Go down and speak to her alone, Rubek.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

And where will you go in the meantime?


MAIA.

[Looking significantly at him.] Henceforth I shall go my own ways.

    [She descends form the hillock and leaps over the brook, by aid
       of her alpenstock.  She stops beside IRENE.


MAIA.

Professor Rubek is up there, waiting for you, madam.


IRENE.

What does he want?


MAIA.

He wants you to help him to open a casket that has snapped to.


IRENE.

Can I help him in that?


MAIA.

He says you are the only person that can.


IRENE.

Then I must try.


MAIA.

Yes, you really must, madam.

    [She goes down by the path to the hotel.
