

MAIA.

Indeed?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Decisively.] I alone can see it. And it amuses me unspeakably.--On the
surface I give them the "striking likeness," as they call it, that they
all stand and gape at in astonishment--[Lowers his voice]--but at bottom
they are all respectable, pompous horse-faces, and self-opinionated
donkey-muzzles, and lop-eared, low-browed dog-skulls, and fatted
swine-snouts--and sometimes dull, brutal bull-fronts as well--


MAIA.

[Indifferently.] All the dear domestic animals, in fact.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Simply the dear domestic animals, Maia. All the animals which men have
bedevilled in their own image--and which have bedevilled men in return.
[Empties his champagne-glass and laughs.] And it is these double-faced
works of art that our excellent plutocrats come and order of me. And
pay for in all good faith--and in good round figures too--almost their
weight in gold, as the saying goes.


MAIA.

[Fills his glass.] Come, Rubek! Drink and be happy.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Passes his hand several times across his forehead and leans back in his
chair.] I am happy, Maia. Really happy--in a way. [Short silence.]
For after all there is a certain happiness in feeling oneself free and
independent on every hand--in having at ones command everything one can
possibly wish for--all outward things, that is to say. Do you not agree
with me, Maia?


MAIA.

Oh yes, I agree. All that is well enough in its way. [Looking at
him.] But do you remember what you promised me the day we came to an
understanding on--on that troublesome point--


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Nods.] --on the subject of our marriage, yes. It was no easy matter for
you, Maia.


MAIA.

[Continuing unruffled.] --and agreed that I was to go abroad with you,
and live there for good and all--and enjoy myself.--Do you remember what
you promised me that day?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Shaking his head.] No, I can't say that I do. Well, what did I promise?


MAIA.

You said you would take me up to a high mountain and show me all the
glory of the world.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[With a slight start.] Did I promise you that, too?


MAIA.

Me too? Who else, pray?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Indifferently.] No, no, I only meant did I promise to show you--?


MAIA. --all the glory of the world? Yes, you did. And all that glory
should be mine, you said.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

That is sort of figure of speech that I was in the habit of using once
upon a time.


MAIA.

Only a figure of speech?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Yes, a schoolboy phrase--the sort of thing I used to say when I wanted
to lure the neighbours' children out to play with me, in the woods and
on the mountains.


MAIA.

[Looking hard at him.] Perhaps you only wanted to lure me out to play,
as well?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Passing it off as a jest.] Well, has it not been a tolerable amusing
game, Maia?


MAIA.

[Coldly.] I did not go with you only to play.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

No, no, I daresay not.


MAIA.

And you never took me up with you to any high mountain, or showed me--


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[With irritation.] --all the glory of the world? No, I did not. For, let
me tell you something: you are not really born to be a mountain-climber,
little Maia.


MAIA.

[Trying to control herself.] Yet at one time you seemed to think I was.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Four or five years ago, yes. [Stretching himself in his chair.] Four or
five years--it's a long, long time, Maia.


MAIA.

[Looking at him with a bitter expression.] Has the time seemed so very
long to you, Rubek?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

I am beginning now to find it a trifle long. [Yawning.] Now and then,
you know.


MAIA.

[Returning to her place.] I shall not bore you any longer.

      [She resumes her seat, takes up the newspaper, and begins turning
       over the leaves.  Silence on both sides.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Leaning on his elbows across the table, and looking at her teasingly.]
Is the Frau Professor offended?


MAIA.

[Coldly, without looking up.] No, not at all.

    [Visitors to the baths, most of them ladies, begin to pass,
       singly and in groups, through the park from the right, and
       out to the left.

    [Waiters bring refreshments from the hotel, and go off behind
       the pavilion.

    [The INSPECTOR, wearing gloves and carrying a stick, comes from
       his rounds in the park, meets visitors, bows politely, and
       exchanges a few words with some of them.


THE INSPECTOR.

[Advancing to PROFESSOR RUBEK's table and politely taking off his hat.]
I have the honour to wish you good morning, Mrs. Rubek.--Good morning,
Professor Rubek.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Good morning, good morning Inspector.


THE INSPECTOR.

[Addressing himself to MRS. RUBEK.] May I venture to ask if you have
slept well?


MAIA.

Yes, thank you; excellently--for my part. I always sleep like a stone.


THE INSPECTOR.

I am delighted to hear it. The first night in a strange place is often
rather trying.--And the Professor--?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Oh, my night's rest is never much to boast of--especially of late.
