suggestion of the supernatural, we are confronted with the wholly
impossible, the inconceivable. How remote is this alike from his
principles of art and from the consistent, unvarying practice of his
better years! So great is the chasm between _John Gabriel Borkman_ and
_When We Dead Awaken_ that one could almost suppose his mental breakdown
to have preceded instead of followed the writing of the latter play.
Certainly it is one of the premonitions of the coming end. It is Ibsen's
_Count Robert of Paris_. To pretend to rank it with his masterpieces is
to show a very imperfect sense of the nature of their mastery.





WHEN WE DEAD AWAKEN.

A DRAMATIC EPILOGUE.


CHARACTERS.


      PROFESSOR ARNOLD RUBEK, a sculptor.
      MRS. MAIA RUBEK, his wife.
      THE INSPECTOR at the Baths.
      ULFHEIM, a landed proprietor.
      A STRANGER LADY.
      A SISTER OF MERCY.

      Servants, Visitors to the Baths, and Children.


The First Act passes at a bathing establishment on the coast; the Second
and Third Acts in the neighbourhood of a health resort, high in the
mountains.




ACT FIRST.


   [Outside the Bath Hotel. A portion of the main building can be seen
   to the right.

   An open, park-like place with a fountain, groups
   of fine old trees, and shrubbery.  To the left, a little pavilion
   almost covered with ivy and Virginia creeper.  A table and chair
   outside it.  At the back a view over the fjord, right out to sea,
   with headlands and small islands in the distance.  It is a calm,
   warm and sunny summer morning.

   [PROFESSOR RUBEK and MRS. MAIA RUBEK are sitting in basket chairs
   beside a covered table on the lawn outside the hotel, having just
   breakfasted.  They have champagne and seltzer water on the table,
   and each has a newspaper.  PROFESSOR RUBEK is an elderly man of
   distinguished appearance, wearing a black velvet jacket, and
   otherwise in light summer attire.  MAIA is quite young, with
   a vivacious expression and lively, mocking eyes, yet with a
   suggestion of fatigue.  She wears an elegant travelling dress.


MAIA.

[Sits for some time as though waiting for the PROFESSOR to say
something, then lets her paper drop with a deep sigh.] Oh dear, dear,
dear--!


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Looks up from his paper.] Well, Maia? What is the matter with you?


MAIA.

Just listen how silent it is here.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Smiles indulgently.] And you can hear that?


MAIA.

What?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

The silence?


MAIA.

Yes, indeed I can.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Well, perhaps you are right, _mein Kind_. One can really hear the
silence.


MAIA.

Heaven knows you can--when it's so absolutely overpowering as it is
here--


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Here at the Baths, you mean?


MAIA.

Wherever you go at home here, it seems to me. Of course there was noise
and bustle enough in the town. But I don't know how it is--even the
noise and bustle seemed to have something dead about it.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[With a searching glance.] You don't seem particularly glad to be at
home again, Maia?


MAIA.

[Looks at him.] Are you glad?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Evasively.] I--?


MAIA.

Yes, you, who have been so much, much further away than I. Are you
entirely happy, now that you are at home again?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

No--to be quite candid--perhaps not entirely happy--


MAIA.

[With animation.] There, you see! Didn't I know it!


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

I have been too long abroad. I have drifted quite away from all
this--this home life.


MAIA.

[Eagerly, drawing her chair nearer him.] There, you see, Rubek! We had
much better get away again! As quickly as ever we can.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Somewhat impatiently.] Well, well, that is what we intend to do, my
dear Maia. You know that.


MAIA.

But why not now--at once? Only think how cozy and comfortable we could
be down there, in our lovely new house--


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Smiles indulgently.] We ought by rights to say: our lovely new home.


MAIA.

[Shortly.] I prefer to say house--let us keep to that.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[His eyes dwelling on her.] You are really a strange little person.


MAIA.

Am I so strange?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Yes, I think so.


MAIA.

But why, pray? Perhaps because I'm not desperately in love with mooning
about up here--?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Which of us was it that was absolutely bent on our coming north this
summer?


MAIA.

I admit, it was I.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

It was certainly not I, at any rate.


MAIA.

But good heavens, who could have dreamt that everything would have
altered so terribly at home here? And in so short a time, too! Why, it
is only just four years since I went away--


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Since you were married, yes.


MAIA.

Married? What has that to do with the matter?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Continuing.] --since you became the Frau Professor, and found yourself
mistress of a charming home--I beg your pardon--a very handsome house, I
ought to say. And a villa on the Lake of Taunitz, just at the point that
has become most fashionable, too--. In fact it is all very handsome and
