distinguished, Maia, there's no denying that. And spacious too. We need
not always be getting in each other's way--


MAIA.

[Lightly.] No, no, no--there's certainly no lack of house-room, and that
sort of thing--


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Remember, too, that you have been living in altogether more spacious
and distinguished surroundings--in more polished society than you were
accustomed to at home.


MAIA.

[Looking at him.] Ah, so you think it is _I_ that have changed?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Indeed I do, Maia.


MAIA.

I alone? Not the people here?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Oh yes, they too--a little, perhaps. And not at all in the direction of
amiability. That I readily admit.


MAIA.

I should think you must admit it, indeed.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Changing the subject.] Do you know how it affects me when I look at the
life of the people around us here?


MAIA.

No. Tell me.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

It makes me think of that night we spent in the train, when we were
coming up here--


MAIA.

Why, you were sound asleep all the time.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Not quite. I noticed how silent it became at all the little roadside
stations. I heard the silence--like you, Maia--


MAIA.

H'm,--like me, yes.


PROFESSOR RUBEK. --and that assured me that we had crossed the
frontier--that we were really at home. For the train stopped at all the
little stations--although there was nothing doing at all.


MAIA.

Then why did it stop--though there was nothing to be done?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Can't say. No one got out or in; but all the same the train stopped a
long, endless time. And at every station I could make out that there
were two railway men walking up and down the platform--one with a
lantern in his hand--and they said things to each other in the night,
low, and toneless, and meaningless.


MAIA.

Yes, that is quite true. There are always two men walking up and down,
and talking--


PROFESSOR RUBEK. --of nothing. [Changing to a livelier tone.] But just
wait till to-morrow. Then we shall have the great luxurious steamer
lying in the harbour. We'll go on board her, and sail all round the
coast--northward ho!--right to the polar sea.


MAIA.

Yes, but then you will see nothing of the country--and of the people.
And that was what you particularly wanted.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Shortly and snappishly.] I have seen more than enough.


MAIA.

Do you think a sea voyage will be better for you?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

It is always a change.


MAIA.

Well, well, if only it is the right thing for you--


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

For me? The right thing? There is nothing in the world the matter with
me.


MAIA.

[Rises and goes to him.] Yes, there is, Rubek. I am sure you must feel
it yourself.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Why my dearest Maia--what should be amiss with me?


MAIA.

[Behind him, bending over the back of his chair.] That you must tell me.
You have begun to wander about without a moment's peace. You cannot rest
anywhere--neither at home nor abroad. You have become quite misanthropic
of late.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[With a touch of sarcasm.] Dear me--have you noticed that?


MAIA.

No one that knows you can help noticing it. And then it seems to me so
sad that you have lost all pleasure in your work.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

That too, eh?


MAIA.

You that used to be so indefatigable--working from morning to night!


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Gloomily.] Used to be, yes--


MAIA.

But ever since you got your great masterpiece out of hand--


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Nods thoughtfully.] "The Resurrection Day"--


MAIA. --the masterpiece that has gone round the whole world, and made
you so famous--


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Perhaps that is just the misfortune, Maia.


MAIA.

How so?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

When I had finished this masterpiece of mine--[Makes a passionate
movement with his hand]--for "The Resurrection Day" is a masterpiece! Or
was one in the beginning. No, it is one still. It must, must, must be a
masterpiece!


MAIA.

[Looks at him in astonishment.] Why, Rubek--all the world knows that.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Short, repellently.] All the world knows nothing! Understands nothing!


MAIA.

Well, at any rate it can divine something--


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Something that isn't there at all, yes. Something that never was in my
mind. Ah yes, that they can all go into ecstasies over! [Growling to
himself.] What is the good of working oneself to death for the mob and
the masses--for "all the world"!


MAIA.

Do you think it is better, then--do you think it is worthy of you, to do
nothing at all but portrait-bust now and then?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[With a sly smile.] They are not exactly portrait-busts that I turn out,
Maia.


MAIA.

Yes, indeed they are--for the last two or three years--ever since you
finished your great group and got it out of the house--


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

All the same, they are no mere portrait-busts, I assure you.


MAIA.

What are they, then?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

There is something equivocal, something cryptic, lurking in and behind
these busts--a secret something, that the people themselves cannot see--
