hated you, Arnold--


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Warmly.] That you did not, Irene! That is not true!


IRENE.

I hated you, because you could stand there so unmoved--


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Laughs.] Unmoved? Do you think so?


IRENE. --at any rate so intolerably self-controlled. And because you
were an artist and an artist only--not a man! [Changing to a tone full
of warmth and feeling.] But that statue in the wet, living clay, that
I loved--as it rose up, a vital human creature, out of those raw,
shapeless masses--for that was our creation, our child. Mine and yours.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Sadly.] It was so in spirit and in truth.


IRENE.

Let me tell you, Arnold--it is for the sake of this child of ours that I
have undertaken this long pilgrimage.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Suddenly alert.] For the statue's--?


IRENE.

Call it what you will. I call it our child.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

And now you want to see it? Finished? In marble, which you always
thought so cold? [Eagerly.] You do not know, perhaps, that it is
installed in a great museum somewhere--far out in the world?


IRENE.

I have heard a sort of legend about it.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

And museums were always a horror to you. You called them grave-vaults--


IRENE.

I will make a pilgrimage to the place where my soul and my child's soul
lie buried.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Uneasy and alarmed.] You must never see that statue again! Do you hear,
Irene! I implore you--! Never, never see it again!


IRENE.

Perhaps you think it would mean death to me a second time?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Clenching his hands together.] Oh, I don't know what I think.--But how
could I ever imagine that you would fix your mind so immovably on that
statue? You, who went away from me--before it was completed.


IRENE.

It was completed. That was why I could go away from you--and leave you
alone.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Sits with his elbows upon his knees, rocking his head from side to
side, with his hands before his eyes.] It was not what it afterwards
became.


IRENE.

[Quietly but quick as lightning, half-unsheathes a narrow-bladed sharp
knife which she carried in her breast, and asks in a hoarse whisper.]
Arnold--have you done any evil to our child?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Evasively.] Any evil?--How can I be sure what you would call it?


IRENE.

[Breathless.] Tell me at once: what have you done to the child?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

I will tell you, if you will sit and listen quietly to what I say.


IRENE.

[Hides the knife.] I will listen as quietly as a mother can when she--


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Interrupting.] And you must not look at me while I am telling you.


IRENE.

[Moves to a stone behind his back.] I will sit here, behind you.--Now
tell me.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Takes his hands from before his eyes and gazes straight in front of
him. When I had found you, I knew at once how I should make use of you
for my life-work.


IRENE.

"The Resurrection Day" you called your life-work.--I call it "our
child."


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

I was young then--with no knowledge of life. The Resurrection, I
thought, would be most beautifully and exquisitely figured as a young
unsullied woman--with none of our earth-life's experiences--awakening
to light and glory without having to put away from her anything ugly and
impure.


IRENE.

[Quickly.] Yes--and so I stand there now, in our work?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Hesitating.] Not absolutely and entirely so, Irene.


IRENE.

[In rising excitement.] Not absolutely--? Do I not stand as I always
stood for you?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Without answering.] I learned worldly wisdom in the years that
followed, Irene. "The Resurrection Day" became in my mind's eye
something more and something--something more complex. The little round
plinth on which your figure stood erect and solitary--it no longer
afforded room for all the imagery I now wanted to add--


IRENE.

[Groped for her knife, but desists.] What imagery did you add then? Tell
me!


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

I imagined that which I saw with my eyes around me in the world. I had
to include it--I could not help it, Irene. I expanded the plinth--made
it wide and spacious. And on it I placed a segment of the curving,
bursting earth. And up from the fissures of the soil there now swarm men
and women with dimly-suggested animal-faces. Women and men--as I knew
them in real life.


IRENE.

[In breathless suspense.] But in the middle of the rout there stands the
young woman radiant with the joy of light?--Do I not stand so, Arnold?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Evasively.] Not quite in the middle. I had unfortunately to move
that figure a little back. For the sake of the general effect, you
understand. Otherwise it would have dominated the whole too much.


IRENE.

But the joy in the light still transfigures my face?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Yes, it does, Irene--in a way. A little subdued perhaps--as my altered
idea required.


IRENE.

[Rising noiselessly.] That design expresses the life you now see,
Arnold.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Yes, I suppose it does.


IRENE.

And in that design you have shifted me back, a little toned down--to
