serve as a background-figure--in a group.

    [She draws the knife.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Not a background-figure. Let us say, at most, a figure not quite in the
foreground--or something of that sort.


IRENE.

[Whispers hoarsely.] There you uttered your own doom.

    [On the point of striking.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Turns and looks up at her.] Doom?


IRENE.

[Hastily hides the knife, and says as though choked with agony.] My
whole soul--you and I--we, we, we and our child were in that solitary
figure.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Eagerly, taking off his hat and drying the drops of sweat upon his
brow.] Yes, but let me tell you, too, how I have placed myself in the
group. In front, beside a fountain--as it were here--sits a man weighed
down with guilt, who cannot quite free himself from the earth-crust.
I call him remorse for a forfeited life. He sits there and dips his
fingers in the purling stream--to wash them clean--and he is gnawed and
tortured by the thought that never, never will he succeed. Never in all
eternity will he attain to freedom and the new life. He will remain for
ever prisoned in his hell.


IRENE.

[Hardly and coldly.] Poet!


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Why poet?


IRENE.

Because you are nerveless and sluggish and full of forgiveness for
all the sins of your life, in thought and in act. You have killed
my soul--so you model yourself in remorse, and self-accusation, and
penance--[Smiling.] --and with that you think your account is cleared.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Defiantly.] I am an artist, Irene. And I take no shame to myself for
the frailties that perhaps cling to me. For I was born to be an artist,
you see. And, do what I may, I shall never be anything else.


IRENE.

[Looks at him with a lurking evil smile, and says gently and softly.]
You are a poet, Arnold. [Softly strokes his hair.] You dear, great,
middle-aged child,--is it possible that you cannot see that!


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Annoyed.] Why do you keep on calling me a poet?


IRENE.

[With malign eyes.] Because there is something apologetic in the word,
my friend. Something that suggests forgiveness of sins--and spreads
a cloak over all frailty. [With a sudden change of tone.] But I was a
human being--then! And I, too, had a life to live,--and a human destiny
to fulfil. And all that, look you, I let slip--gave it all up in order
to make myself your bondwoman.--Oh, it was self-murder--a deadly sin
against myself! [Half whispering.] And that sin I can never expiate!

    [She seats herself near him beside the brook, keeps close, though
       unnoticed, watch upon him, and, as though in absence of mind,
       plucks some flowers form the shrubs around them.


IRENE.

[With apparent self-control.] I should have borne children in the
world--many children--real children--not such children as are hidden
away in grave-vaults. That was my vocation. I ought never to have served
you--poet.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Lost in recollection.] Yet those were beautiful days, Irene.
Marvellously beautiful days--as I now look back upon them--


IRENE.

[Looking at him with a soft expression.] Can you remember a little word
that you said--when you had finished--finished with me and with our
child? [Nods to him.] Can you remember that little word, Arnold?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Looks inquiringly at her.] Did I say a little word then, which you
still remember?


IRENE.

Yes, you did. Can you not recall it?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Shaking his head.] No, I can't say that I do. Not at the present
moment, at any rate.


IRENE.

You took both my hands and pressed them warmly. And I stood there in
breathless expectation. And then you said: "So now, Irene, I thank you
from my heart. This," you said, "has been a priceless episode for me."


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Looks doubtfully at her.] Did I say "episode"? It is not a word I am in
the habit of using.


IRENE.

You said "episode."


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[With assumed cheerfulness.] Well, well--after all, it was in reality an
episode.


IRENE.

[Curtly.] At that word I left you.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

You take everything so painfully to heart, Irene.


IRENE.

[Drawing her hand over her forehead.] Perhaps you are right. Let us
shake off all the hard things that go to the heart. [Plucks off the
leaves of a mountain rose and strews them on the brook.] Look there,
Arnold. There are our birds swimming.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

What birds are they?


IRENE.

Can you not see? Of course they are flamingoes. Are they not rose-red?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Flamingoes do not swim. They only wade.


IRENE.

Then they are not flamingoes. They are sea-gulls.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

They may be sea-gulls with red bills, yes. [Plucks broad green leaves
and throws them into the brook.] Now I send out my ships after them.


IRENE.

But there must be no harpoon-men on board.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

No, there shall be no harpoon-men. [Smiles to her.] Can you remember the
summer when we used to sit like this outside the little peasant hut on
the Lake of Taunitz?


IRENE.

[Nods.] On Saturday evenings, yes,--when we had finished our week's
