[Is silent for a short time.] What poems have you made since? In marble
I mean. Since the day I left you.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

I have made no poems since that day--only frittered away my life in
modelling.


IRENE.

And that woman, whom you are now living with--?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Interrupting vehemently.] Do not speak of her now! It makes me tingle
with shame.


IRENE.

Where are you thinking of going with her?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Slack and weary.] Oh, on a tedious coasting-voyage to the North, I
suppose.


IRENE.

[Looks at him, smiles almost imperceptibly, and whispers.] You should
rather go high up into the mountains. As high as ever you can. Higher,
higher,--always higher, Arnold.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[With eager expectation.] Are you going up there?


IRENE.

Have you the courage to meet me once again?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Struggling with himself, uncertainly.] If we could--oh, if only we
could--!


IRENE.

Why can we not do what we will? [Looks at him and whispers beseechingly
with folded hands.] Come, come, Arnold! Oh, come up to me--!

    [MAIA enters, glowing with pleasure, from behind the hotel,
       and goes quickly up to the table where they were previously
       sitting.]


MAIA.

[Still at the corner of the hotel, without looking around.] Oh, you
may say what you please, Rubek, but--[Stops, as she catches sight of
IRENE]--Oh, I beg your pardon--I see you have made an acquaintance.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Curtly.] Renewed an acquaintance. [Rises.] What was it you wanted with
me?


MAIA.

I only wanted to say this: you may do whatever you please, but _I_ am
not going with you on that disgusting steamboat.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Why not?


MAIA.

Because I want to go up on the mountains and into the forests--that's
what I want. [Coaxingly.] Oh, you must let me do it, Rubek.--I shall be
so good, so good afterwards!


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Who is it that has put these ideas into your head?


MAIA.

Why he--that horrid bear-killer. Oh you cannot conceive all the
marvelous things he has to tell about the mountains. And about life up
there! They're ugly, horrid, repulsive, most of the yarns he spins--for
I almost believe he's lying--but wonderfully alluring all the same. Oh,
won't you let me go with him? Only to see if what he says is true, you
understand. May I, Rubek?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Yes, I have not the slightest objection. Off you go to the mountains--as
far and as long as you please. I shall perhaps be going the same way
myself.


MAIA.

[Quickly.] No, no, no, you needn't do that! Not on my account!


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

I want to go to the mountains. I have made up my mind to go.


MAIA.

Oh thanks, thanks! May I tell the bear-killer at once?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Tell the bear-killer whatever you please.


MAIA.

Oh thanks, thanks, thanks! [Is about to take his hand; he repels the
movement.] Oh, how dear and good you are to-day, Rubek!

    [She runs into the hotel.

    [At the same time the door of the pavilion is softly and
       noiselessly set ajar.  The SISTER OF MERCY stands in the
       opening, intently on the watch.  No one sees her.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Decidedly, turning to IRENE.] Shall we meet up there then?


IRENE.

[Rising slowly.] Yes, we shall certainly meet.--I have sought for you so
long.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

When did you begin to seek for me, Irene?


IRENE.

[With a touch of jesting bitterness.] From the moment I realised that I
had given away to you something rather indispensable, Arnold. Something
one ought never to part with.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Bowing his head.] Yes, that is bitterly true. You gave me three or four
years of your youth.


IRENE.

More, more than that I gave you--spend-thrift as I then was.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Yes, you were prodigal, Irene. You gave me all your naked loveliness--


IRENE. --to gaze upon--


PROFESSOR RUBEK. --and to glorify--


IRENE.

Yes, for your own glorification.--And the child's.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

And yours too, Irene.


IRENE.

But you have forgotten the most precious gift.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

The most precious--? What gift was that?


IRENE.

I gave you my young, living soul. And that gift left me empty
within--soulless. [Looking at him with a fixed stare.] It was that I
died of, Arnold.

    [The SISTER OF MERCY opens the door wide and makes room for her.
       She goes into the pavilion.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Stands and looks after her; then whispers.] Irene!




ACT SECOND.


[Near a mountain resort. The landscape stretches, in the form of
   an immense treeless upland, towards a long mountain lake.  Beyond
   the lake rises a range of peaks with blue-white snow in the clefts.
   In the foreground on the left a purling brook falls in severed
   streamlets down a steep wall of rock, and thence flows smoothly
   over the upland until it disappears to the right.  Dwarf trees,
   plants, and stones along the course of the brook.  In the
   foreground on the right a hillock, with a stone bench on the
   top of it.  It is a summer afternoon, towards sunset.
