
[Deep in thought.] There's a great deal of truth in what you say.


ULFHEIM.

Yes, for I take it the stone has something to fight for too. It is dead,
and determined by no manner of means to let itself be hammered into
life. Just like the bear when you come and prod him up in his lair.


MAIA.

Are you going up into the forests now to hunt?


ULFHEIM.

I am going right up into the high mountain.--I suppose you have never
been in the high mountain, madam?


MAIA.

No, never.


ULFHEIM.

Confound it all then, you must be sure and come up there this very
summer! I'll take you with me--both you and the Professor, with
pleasure.


MAIA.

Thanks. But Rubek is thinking of taking a sea trip this summer.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

Round the coast--through the island channels.


ULFHEIM.

Ugh--what the devil would you do in those damnable sickly
gutters--floundering about in the brackish ditchwater? Dishwater I
should rather call it.


MAIA.

There, you hear, Rubek!


ULFHEIM.

No, much better come up with me to the mountain--away, clean away, from
the trail and taint of men. You cant' think what that means for me. But
such a little lady--

    [He stops.

    [The SISTER OF MERCY comes out of the pavilion and goes into
       the hotel.


ULFHEIM.

[Following her with his eyes.] Just look at her, do! That night-crow
there!--Who is it that's to be buried?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

I have not heard of any one--


ULFHEIM.

Well, there's some one on the point of giving up the ghost, then--in on
corner or another.--People that are sickly and rickety should have the
goodness to see about getting themselves buried--the sooner the better.


MAIA.

Have you ever been ill yourself, Mr. Ulfheim.


ULFHEIM.

Never. If I had, I shouldn't be here.--But my nearest friends--they have
been ill, poor things.


MAIA.

And what did you do for your nearest friends?


ULFHEIM.

Shot them, of course.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Looking at him.] Shot them?


MAIA.

[Moving her chair back.] Shot them dead?


ULFHEIM.

[Nods.] I never miss, madam.


MAIA.

But how can you possibly shoot people!


ULFHEIM.

I am not speaking of people--


MAIA.

You said your nearest friends--


ULFHEIM.

Well, who should they be but my dogs?


MAIA.

Are your dogs your nearest friends?


ULFHEIM.

I have none nearer. My honest, trusty, absolutely loyal comrades--. When
one of them turns sick and miserable--bang!--and there's my friend sent
packing--to the other world.

    [The SISTER OF MERCY comes out of the hotel with a tray on which
       is bread and milk.  She places it on the table outside the
       pavilion, which she enters.


ULFHEIM.

[Laughs scornfully.] That stuff there--is that what you call food for
human beings! Milk and water and soft, clammy bread. Ah, you should see
my comrades feeding. Should you like to see it?


MAIA.

[Smiling across to the PROFESSOR and rising.] Yes, very much.


ULFHEIM.

[Also rising.] Spoken like a woman of spirit, madam! Come with me, then!
They swallow whole great thumping meat-bones--gulp them up and then gulp
them down again. Oh, it's a regular treat to see them. Come along and
I'll show you--and while we're about it, we can talk over this trip to
the mountains--

    [He goes out by the corner of the hotel, MAIA following him.

    [Almost at the same moment the STRANGE LADY comes out of the
       pavilion and seats herself at the table.

    [The LADY raises her glass of milk and is about to drink, but
       stops and looks across at RUBEK with vacant, expressionless
       eyes.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Remains sitting at his table and gazes fixedly and earnestly at her.
At last he rises, goes some steps towards her, stops, and says in a low
voice.] I know you quite well, Irene.


THE LADY.

[In a toneless voice, setting down her glass.] You can guess who I am,
Arnold?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Without answering.] And you recognise me, too, I see.


THE LADY.

With you it is quite another matter.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

With me?--How so?


THE LADY.

Oh, you are still alive.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Not understanding.] Alive--?


THE LADY.

[After a short pause.] Who was the other? The woman you had with
you--there at the table?


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[A little reluctantly.] She? That was my--my wife.


THE LADY.

[Nods slowly.] Indeed. That is well, Arnold. Some one, then, who does
not concern me--


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Nods.] No, of course not--


THE LADY. --one whom you have taken to you after my lifetime.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Suddenly looking hard at her.] After your--? What do you mean by that,
Irene?


IRENE.

[Without answering.] And the child? I hear the child is prospering too.
Our child survives me--and has come to honour and glory.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Smiles as at a far-off recollection.] Our child? Yes, we called it
so--then.


IRENE.

In my lifetime, yes.


PROFESSOR RUBEK.

[Trying to take a lighter tone.] Yes, Irene.--I can assure you "our
child" has become famous all the wide world over. I suppose you have
read about it.


IRENE.
