you let them go.


ULFHEIM.

[Still smiling.] Well, why did I let them go then? Let us hear.


MAIA.

You let them go because you wanted to get rid of Lars. He was to run
after them and bring them in again, you said. And in the meant-time--.
Oh, it was a pretty way to behave!


ULFHEIM.

In the meantime?


MAIA.

[Curtly breaking off.] No matter!


ULFHEIM.

[In a confidential tone.] Lars won't find them. You may safely swear to
that. He won't come with them before the time's up.


MAIA.

[Looking angrily at him.] No, I daresay not.


ULFHEIM.

[Catching at her arm.] For Lars--he knows my--my methods of sport, you
see.


MAIA.

[Eludes him, and measures him with a glance.] Do you know what you look
like, Mr. Ulfheim?


ULFHEIM.

I should think I'm probably most like myself.


MAIA.

Yes, there you're exactly right. For you're the living image of a faun.


ULFHEIM.

A faun?


MAIA.

Yes, precisely; a faun.


ULFHEIM.

A faun! Isn't that a sort of monster? Or a kind of a wood demon, as you
might call it?


MAIA.

Yes, just the sort of creature you are. A thing with a goat's beard and
goat-legs. Yes, and the faun has horns too!


ULFHEIM.

So, so!--has he horns too?


MAIA.

A pair of ugly horns, just like yours, yes.


ULFHEIM.

Can you see the poor little horns _I_ have?


MAIA.

Yes, I seem to see them quite plainly.


ULFHEIM.

[Taking the dogs' leash out of his pocket.] Then I had better see about
tying you.


MAIA.

Have you gone quite mad? Would you tie me?


ULFHEIM.

If I am a demon, let me be a demon! So that's the way of it! You can see
the horns, can you?


MAIA.

[Soothingly.] There, there, there! Now try to behave nicely, Mr.
Ulfheim. [Breaking off.] But what has become of that hunting-castle
of yours, that you boasted so much of? You said it lay somewhere
hereabouts.


ULFHEIM.

[Points with a flourish to the hut.] There you have it, before your very
eyes.


MAIA.

[Looks at him.] That old pig-stye!


ULFHEIM.

[Laughing in his beard.] It has harboured more than one king's daughter,
I can tell you.


MAIA.

Was it there that that horrid man you told me about came to the king's
daughter in the form of a bear?


ULFHEIM.

Yes, my fair companion of the chase--this is the scene. [With a gesture
of invitation.] If you would deign to enter--


MAIA.

Isch! If ever I set foot in it--! Isch!


ULFHEIM.

Oh, two people can doze away a summer night in there comfortably enough.
Or a whole summer, if it comes to that!


MAIA.

Thanks! One would need to have a pretty strong taste for that kind of
thing. [Impatiently.] But now I am tired both of you and the hunting
expedition. Now I am going down to the hotel--before people awaken down
there.


ULFHEIM.

How do you propose to get down from here?


MAIA.

That's your affair. There must be a way down somewhere or other, I
suppose.


ULFHEIM.

[Pointing towards the back.] Oh, certainly! There is a sort of
way--right down the face of the precipice yonder--


MAIA.

There, you see. With a little goodwill--


ULFHEIM. --but just you try if you dare go that way.


MAIA.

[Doubtfully.] Do you think I can't?


ULFHEIM.

Never in this world--if you don't let me help you.


MAIA.

[Uneasily.] Why, then come and help me! What else are you here for?


ULFHEIM.

Would you rather I should take you on my back--?


MAIA.

Nonsense!


ULFHEIM. --or carry you in my arms?


MAIA.

Now do stop talking that rubbish!


ULFHEIM.

[With suppressed exasperation.] I once took a young girl--lifted her up
from the mire of the streets and carried her in my arms. Next my heart I
carried her. So I would have borne her all through life--lest haply she
should dash her foot against a stone. For her shoes were worn very thin
when I found her--


MAIA.

And yet you took her up and carried her next your heart?


ULFHEIM.

Took her up out of the gutter and carried her as high and as carefully
as I could. [With a growling laugh.] And do you know what I got for my
reward?


MAIA.

No. What did you get?


ULFHEIM.

[Looks at her, smiles and nods.] I got the horns! The horns that you can
see so plainly. Is not that a comical story, madam bear-murderess?


MAIA.

Oh yes, comical enough! But I know another story that is still more
comical.


ULFHEIM.

How does that story go?


MAIA.

This is how it goes. There was once a stupid girl, who had both a father
and a mother--but a rather poverty-stricken home. Then there came a high
and mighty seigneur into the midst of all this poverty. And he took the
girl in his arms--as you did--and travelled far, far away with her--


ULFHEIM.

Was she so anxious to be with him?


MAIA.

Yes, for she was stupid, you see.


ULFHEIM.

And he, no doubt, was a brilliant and beautiful personage?


MAIA.

Oh, no, he wasn't so superlatively beautiful either. But he pretended
that he would take her with him to the top of the highest of mountains,
where there were light and sunshine without end.


ULFHEIM.

So he was a mountaineer, was he, that man?


MAIA.

Yes, he was--in his way.
