will do! Now give it to-to-(stamps his foot)--what the deuce is her
name?--give it to the maid, and tell her to take it at once to the
Mayor.

(Mrs. Stockmann takes the packet and goes out through the dining-room.)

Petra. What do you think Uncle Peter will say, father?

Dr. Stockmann. What is there for him to say? I should think he would be
very glad that such an important truth has been brought to light.

Hovstad. Will you let me print a short note about your discovery in the
"Messenger?"

Dr. Stockmann. I shall be very much obliged if you will.

Hovstad. It is very desirable that the public should be informed of it
without delay.

Dr. Stockmann. Certainly.

Mrs. Stockmann (coming back). She has just gone with it.

Billing. Upon my soul, Doctor, you are going to be the foremost man in
the town!

 Dr. Stockmann (walking about happily). Nonsense! As a matter of
fact I have done nothing more than my duty. I have only made a lucky
find--that's all. Still, all the same...

Billing. Hovstad, don't you think the town ought to give Dr. Stockmann
some sort of testimonial?

Hovstad. I will suggest it, anyway.

Billing. And I will speak to Aslaksen about it.

Dr. Stockmann. No, my good friends, don't let us have any of that
nonsense. I won't hear anything of the kind. And if the Baths Committee
should think of voting me an increase of salary, I will not accept it.
Do you hear, Katherine?--I won't accept it.

Mrs. Stockmann. You are quite right, Thomas.

Petra (lifting her glass). Your health, father!

Hovstad and Billing. Your health, Doctor! Good health!

Horster (touches glasses with DR. STOCKMANN). I hope it will bring you
nothing but good luck.

Dr. Stockmann. Thank you, thank you, my dear fellows! I feel
tremendously happy! It is a splendid thing for a man to be able to feel
that he has done a service to his native town and to his
fellow-citizens. Hurrah, Katherine! (He puts his arms round her and
whirls her round and round, while she protests with laughing cries.
They all laugh, clap their hands, and cheer the DOCTOR. The boys put
their heads in at the door to see what is going on.)




ACT II


(SCENE,--The same. The door into the dining room is shut. It is
morning. MRS. STOCKMANN, with a sealed letter in her hand, comes in
from the dining room, goes to the door of the DOCTOR'S study, and peeps
in.)

Mrs. Stockmann. Are you in, Thomas?

Dr. Stockmann (from within his room). Yes, I have just come in. (Comes
into the room.) What is it?

Mrs. Stockmann. A letter from your brother.

Dr. Stockmann. Aha, let us see! (Opens the letter and reads:) "I return
herewith the manuscript you sent me" (reads on in a low murmur) H'm!--

Mrs. Stockmann. What does he say?

Dr. Stockmann (putting the papers in his pocket). Oh, he only writes
that he will come up here himself about midday.

Mrs. Stockmann. Well, try and remember to be at home this time.

Dr. Stockmann. That will be all right; I have got through all my
morning visits.

Mrs. Stockmann. I am extremely curious to know how he takes it.

Dr. Stockmann. You will see he won't like it's having been I, and not
he, that made the discovery.

Mrs. Stockmann. Aren't you a little nervous about that?

Dr. Stockmann. Oh, he really will be pleased enough, you know. But, at
the same time, Peter is so confoundedly afraid of anyone's doing any
service to the town except himself.

Mrs. Stockmann. I will tell you what, Thomas--you should be good
natured, and share the credit of this with him. Couldn't you make out
that it was he who set you on the scent of this discovery?

Dr. Stockmann. I am quite willing. If only I can get the thing set
right. I--

(MORTEN KIIL puts his head in through the door leading from the hall,
looks around in an enquiring manner, and chuckles.)

Morten Kiil (slyly). Is it--is it true?

Mrs. Stockmann (going to the door). Father!--is it you?

Dr. Stockmann. Ah, Mr. Kiil--good morning, good morning!

Mrs. Stockmann. But come along in.

Morten Kiil. If it is true, I will; if not, I am off.

Dr. Stockmann. If what is true?

Morten Kiil. This tale about the water supply, is it true?

Dr. Stockmann. Certainly it is true, but how did you come to hear it?

Morten Kiil (coming in). Petra ran in on her way to the school--

Dr. Stockmann. Did she?

Morten Kiil. Yes; and she declares that--I thought she was only making
a fool of me--but it isn't like Petra to do that.

Dr. Stockmann. Of course not. How could you imagine such a thing!

Morten Kiil. Oh well, it is better never to trust anybody; you may find
you have been made a fool of before you know where you are. But it is
really true, all the same?

Dr. Stockmann. You can depend upon it that it is true. Won't you sit
down? (Settles him on the couch.) Isn't it a real bit of luck for the
town--

Morten Kiil (suppressing his laughter). A bit of luck for the town?

Dr. Stockmann. Yes, that I made the discovery in good time.

Morten Kiil (as before). Yes, yes. Yes!--But I should never have
thought you the sort of man to pull your own brother's leg like this!
