
Mrs. Rummel: Indeed they were, Mrs. Lynge. You may think yourself lucky
that you did not live here then.

Mrs. Holt:  Yes, times have changed, and no mistake, when I look back
to the days when I was a girl.

Mrs. Rummel: Oh, you need not look back more than fourteen or fifteen
years. God forgive us, what a life we led! There used to be a Dancing
Society and a Musical Society--

Mrs. Bernick:  And the Dramatic Club. I remember it very well.

Mrs. Rummel: Yes, that was where your play was performed, Mr. Tonnesen.

Hilmar (from the back of the room): What, what?

Rorlund: A play by Mr. Tonnesen?

Mrs. Rummel: Yes, it was long before you came here, Mr. Rorlund. And it
was only performed once.

Mrs. Lynge: Was that not the play in which you told me you took the
part of a young man's sweetheart, Mrs. Rummel?

Mrs. Rummel (glancing towards RORLUND): I? I really cannot remember,
Mrs. Lynge. But I remember well all the riotous gaiety that used to go
on.

Mrs. Holt: Yes, there were houses I could name in which two large
dinner-parties were given in one week.

Mrs. Lynge: And surely I have heard that a touring theatrical company
came here, too?

Mrs. Rummel: Yes, that was the worst thing of the lot.

Mrs. Holt (uneasily):  Ahem!

Mrs. Rummel: Did you say a theatrical company? No, I don't remember
that at all.

Mrs. Lynge: Oh yes, and I have been told they played all sorts of mad
pranks. What is really the truth of those stories?

Mrs. Rummel: There is practically no truth in them, Mrs. Lynge.

Mrs. Holt: Dina, my love, will you give me that linen?

Mrs. Bernick (at the same time): Dina, dear, will you go and ask
Katrine to bring us our coffee?

Martha: I will go with you, Dina. (DINA and MARTHA go out by the
farther door on, the left.)

Mrs. Bernick (getting up): Will you excuse me for a few minutes? I
think we will have our coffee outside. (She goes out to the verandah
and sets to work to lay a table. RORLUND stands in the doorway talking
to her. HILMAR sits outside, smoking.)

Mrs. Rummel (in a low voice): My goodness, Mrs. Lynge, how you
frightened me!

Mrs. Lynge: I?

Mrs. Holt: Yes, but you know it was you that began it, Mrs. Rummel.

Mrs. Rummel: I? How can you say such a thing, Mrs. Holt? Not a syllable
passed my lips!

Mrs. Lynge: But what does it all mean?

Mrs. Rummel:  What made you begin to talk about--? Think--did you not
see that Dina was in the room?

Mrs. Lynge:  Dina? Good gracious, is there anything wrong with--?

Mrs. Holt: And in this house, too! Did you not know it was Mrs.
Bernick's brother--?

Mrs. Lynge: What about him? I know nothing about it at all; I am quite
new to the place, you know.

Mrs. Rummel: Have you not heard that--? Ahem! (To her daughter) Hilda,
dear, you can go for a little stroll in the garden?

Mrs. Holt: You go too, Netta. And be very kind to poor Dina when she
comes back. (HILDA and NETTA go out into the garden.)

Mrs. Lynge: Well, what about Mrs. Bernick's brother?

Mrs. Rummel: Don't you know the dreadful scandal about him?

Mrs. Lynge: A dreadful scandal about Mr. Tonnesen?

Mrs. Rummel: Good Heavens, no. Mr. Tonnesen is her cousin, of course,
Mrs. Lynge. I am speaking of her brother--

Mrs. Holt: The wicked Mr. Tonnesen--

Mrs. Rummel: His name was Johan. He ran away to America.

Mrs. Holt: Had to run away, you must understand.

Mrs. Lynge: Then it is he the scandal is about?

Mrs. Rummel: Yes; there was something--how shall I put it?--there was
something of some kind between him and Dina's mother. I remember it all
as if it were yesterday. Johan Tonnesen was in old Mrs. Bernick's
office then; Karsten Bernick had just come back from Paris--he had not
yet become engaged--

Mrs. Lynge:  Yes, but what was the scandal?

Mrs. Rummel: Well, you must know that Moller's company were acting in
the town that winter--

Mrs. Holt: And Dorf, the actor, and his wife were in the company. All
the young men in the town were infatuated with her.

Mrs. Rummel: Yes, goodness knows how they could think her pretty. Well,
Dorf came home late one evening--

Mrs. Holt: Quite unexpectedly.

Mrs. Rummel: And found his-- No, really it isn't a thing one can talk
about.

Mrs. Holt: After all, Mrs. Rummel, he didn't find anything, because the
door was locked on the inside.

Mrs. Rummel: Yes, that is just what I was going to say--he found the
door locked. And--just think of it--the man that was in the house had
to jump out of the window.

Mrs. Holt: Right down from an attic window.

Mrs. Lynge: And that was Mrs. Bernick's brother?

Mrs. Rummel: Yes, it was he.

Mrs. Lynge: And that was why he ran away to America?

Mrs. Holt: Yes, he had to run away, you may be sure.

Mrs. Rummel: Because something was discovered afterwards that was
nearly as bad; just think--he had been making free with the cash-box...

Mrs. Holt:  But, you know, no one was certain of that, Mrs. Rummel;
perhaps there was no truth in the rumour.

Mrs. Rummel: Well, I must say--! Wasn't it known all over the town? Did
not old Mrs. Bernick nearly go bankrupt as the result of it?  However,
