
Mrs. Alving (with a loud scream). I!

Oswald. Who has a better right than you?

Mrs. Alving. I! Your mother!

Oswald. Just for that reason.

Mrs. Alving. I, who gave you your life!

Oswald, I never asked you for life. And what kind of a life was it that
you gave me? I don't want it! You shall take it back!

Mrs. Alving. Help! Help! (Runs into the hall.)

Oswald (following her). Don't leave me! Where are you going?

Mrs. Alving (in the hall). To fetch the doctor to you, Oswald! Let me
out!

Oswald (going into the hall). You shan't go out. And no one shall come
in. (Turns the key in the lock.)

Mrs. Alving (coming in again). Oswald! Oswald!--my child!

Oswald (following her). Have you a mother's heart--and can bear to see
me suffering this unspeakable terror?

Mrs. Alving (controlling herself, after a moment's silence). There is
my hand on it.

Oswald. Will you--?

Mrs. Alving. If it becomes necessary. But it shan't become necessary:
No, no--it is impossible it should!

Oswald. Let us hope so. And let us live together as long as we can.
Thank you, mother.

(He sits down in the armchair, which MRS. ALVING had moved beside the
couch. Day is breaking; the lamp is still burning on the table.)

Mrs. Alving (coming cautiously nearer). Do you feel calmer now?

Oswald. Yes.

Mrs. Alving (bending over him). It has only been a dreadful fancy of
yours, Oswald. Nothing but fancy. All this upset has been bad for you.
But now you will get some rest, at home with your own mother, my
darling boy. You shall have everything you want, just as you did when
you were a little child.--There, now. The attack is over. You see how
easily it passed off! I knew it would.--And look, Oswald, what a lovely
day we are going to have? Brilliant sunshine. Now you will be able to
see your home properly. (She goes to the table and puts out the lamp.
It is sunrise. The glaciers and peaks in the distance are seen bathed
in bright morning fight.)

Oswald (who has been sitting motionless in the armchair, with his back
to the scene outside, suddenly says:) Mother, give me the sun.

Mrs. Alving (standing at the table, and looking at him in amazement).
What do you say?

Oswald (repeats in a dull, toneless voice). The sun--the sun.

Mrs. Alving (going up to him). Oswald, what is the matter with you?
(OSWALD seems to shrink up in the chair; all his muscles relax; his
face loses its expression, and his eyes stare stupidly. MRS. ALVING is
trembling with terror.) What is it! (Screams.) Oswald! What is the
matter with you! (Throws herself on her knees beside him and shakes
him.) Oswald! Oswald! Look at me! Don't you know me!

Oswald (in an expressionless voice, as before). The sun--the sun.

Mrs. Alving (jumps up despairingly, beats her head with her hands, and
screams). I can't bear it! (Whispers as though paralysed with fear.) I
can't bear it... I Never! (Suddenly.) Where has he got it? (Passes her
hand quickly over his coat.) Here! (Draws back a little spay and
cries:) No, no, no!--Yes!--no, no! (She stands a few steps from him,
her hands thrust into her hair, and stares at him in speechless terror.)

Oswald (sitting motionless, as before). The sun--the sun.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Ghosts, by Henrik Ibsen

