
Dr. Stockmann. That's splendid!--if only we can get away at once.

Mrs. Stockmann. Hush!--wasn't that some one knocking?

Petra. That is uncle, surely.

Dr. Stockmann. Aha! (Calls out.) Come in!

Mrs. Stockmann. Dear Thomas, promise me definitely--. (PETER STOCKMANN
comes in from the hall.)

Peter Stockmann. Oh, you are engaged. In that case, I will--

Dr. Stockmann. No, no, come in.

Peter Stockmann. But I wanted to speak to you alone.

Mrs. Stockmann. We will go into the sitting-room in the meanwhile.

Horster. And I will look in again later.

Dr. Stockmann. No, go in there with them, Captain Horster; I want to
hear more about--.

Horster. Very well, I will wait, then. (He follows MRS. STOCKMANN and
PETRA into the sitting-room.)

Dr. Stockmann. I daresay you find it rather draughty here today. Put
your hat on.

Peter Stockmann. Thank you, if I may. (Does so.) I think I caught cold
last night; I stood and shivered--

Dr. Stockmann. Really? I found it warm enough.

Peter Stockmann. I regret that it was not in my power to prevent those
excesses last night.

Dr. Stockmann. Have you anything in particular to say to me besides
that?

Peter Stockmann (taking a big letter from his pocket). I have this
document for you, from the Baths Committee.

Dr. Stockmann. My dismissal?

Peter Stockmann. Yes, dating from today. (Lays the letter on the
table.) It gives us pain to do it; but, to speak frankly, we dared not
do otherwise on account of public opinion.

Dr. Stockmann (smiling). Dared not? I seem to have heard that word
before, today.

Peter Stockmann. I must beg you to understand your position clearly.
For the future you must not count on any practice whatever in the town.

Dr. Stockmann. Devil take the practice! But why are you so sure of that?

Peter Stockmann. The Householders' Association is circulating a list
from house to house. All right-minded citizens are being called upon to
give up employing you; and I can assure you that not a single head of a
family will risk refusing his signature. They simply dare not.

Dr. Stockmann. No, no; I don't doubt it. But what then?

Peter Stockmann. If I might advise you, it would be best to leave the
place for a little while--

Dr. Stockmann. Yes, the propriety of leaving the place has occurred to
me.

Peter Stockmann. Good. And then, when you have had six months to think
things over, if, after mature consideration, you can persuade yourself
to write a few words of regret, acknowledging your error--

Dr. Stockmann. I might have my appointment restored to me, do you mean?

Peter Stockmann. Perhaps. It is not at all impossible.

Dr. Stockmann. But what about public opinion, then? Surely you would
not dare to do it on account of public feeling...

Peter Stockmann. Public opinion is an extremely mutable thing. And, to
be quite candid with you, it is a matter of great importance to us to
have some admission of that sort from you in writing.

Dr. Stockmann. Oh, that's what you are after, is it! I will just
trouble you to remember what I said to you lately about foxy tricks of
that sort!

Peter Stockmann. Your position was quite different then. At that time
you had reason to suppose you had the whole town at your back--

Dr. Stockmann. Yes, and now I feel I have the whole town ON my
back--(flaring up). I would not do it if I had the devil and his dam on
my back--! Never--never, I tell you!

Peter Stockmann. A man with a family has no right to behave as you do.
You have no right to do it, Thomas.

Dr. Stockmann. I have no right! There is only one single thing in the
world a free man has no right to do. Do you know what that is?

Peter Stockmann. No.

Dr. Stockmann. Of course you don't, but I will tell you. A free man has
no right to soil himself with filth; he has no right to behave in a way
that would justify his spitting in his own face.

Peter Stockmann. This sort of thing sounds extremely plausible, of
course; and if there were no other explanation for your obstinacy--.
But as it happens that there is.

Dr. Stockmann. What do you mean?

Peter Stockmann. You understand, very well what I mean. But, as your
brother and as a man of discretion, I advise you not to build too much
upon expectations and prospects that may so very easily fail you.

Dr. Stockmann. What in the world is all this about?

Peter Stockmann. Do you really ask me to believe that you are ignorant
of the terms of Mr. Kiil's will?

Dr. Stockmann. I know that the small amount he possesses is to go to an
institution for indigent old workpeople. How does that concern me?

Peter Stockmann. In the first place, it is by no means a small amount
that is in question. Mr. Kiil is a fairly wealthy man.

Dr. Stockmann. I had no notion of that!

Peter Stockmann. Hm!--hadn't you really? Then I suppose you had no
notion, either, that a considerable portion of his wealth will come to
your children, you and your wife having a life-rent of the capital. Has
he never told you so?

Dr. Stockmann. Never, on my honour! Quite the reverse; he has
