bell.) What do you want?

Mrs. Alving. I want my boy to be happy, that's what I want. He mustn't
brood over anything. (To REGINA, who has come to the door.) More
champagne--a large bottle.

Oswald. Mother!

Mrs. Alving. Do you think we country people don't know how to live?

Oswald. Isn't she splendid to look at? What a figure! And the picture
of health!

Mrs. Alving (sitting down at the table). Sit down, Oswald, and let us
have a quiet talk.

Oswald (sitting down). You don't know, mother, that I owe Regina a
little reparation.

Mrs. Alving. You!

Oswald. Oh, it was only a little thoughtlessness--call it what you
like. Something quite innocent, anyway. The last time I was home--

Mrs. Alving. Yes?

Oswald. --she used often to ask me questions about Paris, and I told
her one thing and another about the life there. And I remember saying
one day: "Wouldn't you like to go there yourself?"

Mrs. Alving. Well?

Oswald. I saw her blush, and she said: "Yes, I should like to very
much." "All right." I said, "I daresay it might be managed"--or
something of that sort.

Mrs. Alving. And then?

Oswald. I naturally had forgotten all about it; but the day before
yesterday I happened to ask her if she was glad I was to be so long at
home--

Mrs. Alving. Well?

Oswald. --and she looked so queerly at me, and asked: "But what is to
become of my trip to Paris?"

Mrs. Alving. Her trip!

Oswald. And then I got it out of her that she had taken the thing
seriously, and had been thinking about me all the time, and had set
herself to learn French--

Mrs. Alving. So that was why--

Oswald. Mother--when I saw this fine, splendid, handsome girl standing
there in front of me--I had never paid any attention to her before
then--but now, when she stood there as if with open arms ready for me
to take her to myself--

Mrs. Alving. Oswald!

Oswald. --then I realised that my salvation lay in her, for I saw the
joy of life in her!

Mrs. Alving (starting back). The joy of life--? Is there salvation in
that?

Regina (coming in from the dining-room with a bottle of champagne).
Excuse me for being so long; but I had to go to the cellar. (Puts the
bottle down on the table.)

Oswald. Bring another glass, too.

Regina (looking at him in astonishment). The mistress's glass is there,
sir.

Oswald. Yes, but fetch one for yourself, Regina (REGINA starts, and
gives a quick shy glance at MRS. ALVING.) Well?

Regina (in a low and hesitating voice). Do you wish me to, ma'am?

Mrs. Alving. Fetch the glass, Regina. (REGINA goes into the
dining-room.)

Oswald (looking after her). Have you noticed how well she walks?--so
firmly and confidently!

Mrs. Alving. It cannot be, Oswald.

Oswald. It is settled. You must see that. It is no use forbidding it.
(REGINA comes in with a glass, which she holds in her hand.) Sit down,
Regina. (REGINA looks questioningly at MRS. ALVING.)

Mrs. Alving. Sit down. (REGINA sits down on a chair near the
dining-room door, still holding the glass in her hand.) Oswald, what
was it you were saying about the joy of life?

Oswald. Ah, mother--the joy of life! You don't know very much about
that at home here. I shall never realise it here.

Mrs. Alving. Not even when you are with me?

Oswald. Never at home. But you can't understand that.

Mrs. Alving. Yes, indeed I almost think I do understand you now.

Oswald. That--and the joy of work. They are really the same thing at
bottom. Put you don't know anything about that either.

Mrs. Alving. Perhaps you are right. Tell me some more about it, Oswald.

Oswald. Well, all I mean is that here people are brought up to believe
that work is a curse and a punishment for sin, and that life is a state
of wretchedness and that the sooner we can get out of it the better.

Mrs. Alving. A vale of tears, yes.  And we quite conscientiously make
it so.

Oswald. But the people over there will have none of that. There is no
one there who really believes doctrines of that kind any longer. Over
there the mere fact of being alive is thought to be a matter for
exultant happiness. Mother, have you noticed that everything I have
painted has turned upon the joy of life?--always upon the joy of life,
unfailingly. There is light there, and sunshine, and a holiday
feeling--and people's faces beaming with happiness. That is why I am
afraid to stay at home here with you.

Mrs. Alving. Afraid? What are you afraid of here, with me?

Oswald. I am afraid that all these feelings that are so strong in me
would degenerate into something ugly here.

Mrs. Alving (looking steadily at him). Do you think that is what would
happen?

Oswald. I am certain it would. Even if one lived the same life at home
here, as over there--it would never really be the same life.

Mrs. Alving (who has listened anxiously to him, gets up with a
thoughtful expression and says:) Now I see clearly how it all happened.

Oswald. What do you see?

Mrs. Alving. I see it now for the first time. And now I can speak.

Oswald (getting up). Mother, I don't understand you.
