
Manders. Undoubtedly--no one can deny it. And I hear you have begun to
make a name for yourself. I have often seen mention of you in the
papers--and extremely favourable mention, too. Although, I must admit,
lately I have not seen your name so often.

Oswald (going towards the conservatory). I haven't done so much
painting just lately.

Mrs. Alving. An artist must take a rest sometimes, like other people.

Manders. Of course, of course. At those times the artist is preparing
and strengthening himself for a greater effort.

Oswald. Yes. Mother, will dinner soon be ready?

Mrs. Alving. In half an hour. He has a fine appetite, thank goodness.

Manders. And a liking for tobacco too.

Oswald. I found father's pipe in the room upstairs, and--

Manders. Ah, that is what it was!

Mrs. Alving. What?

Manders. When Oswald came in at that door with the pipe in his mouth, I
thought for the moment it was his father in the flesh.

Oswald. Really?

Mrs. Alving. How can you say so! Oswald takes after me.

Manders. Yes, but there is an expression about the corners of his
mouth--something about the lips--that reminds me so exactly of Mr.
Alving--especially when he smokes.

Mrs. Alving. I don't think so at all. To my mind, Oswald has much more
of a clergyman's mouth.

Menders. Well, yes--a good many of my colleagues in the church have a
similar expression.

Mrs. Alving. But put your pipe down, my dear boy. I don't allow any
smoking in here.

Oswald (puts down his pipe). All right, I only wanted to try it,
because I smoked it once when I was a child.

Mrs. Alving. You?

Oswald. Yes; it was when I was quite a little chap. And I can remember
going upstairs to father's room one evening when he was in very good
spirits.

Mrs. Alving. Oh, you can't remember anything about those days.

Oswald. Yes, I remember plainly that he took me on his knee and let me
smoke his pipe. "Smoke, my boy," he said, "have a good smoke, boy!" And
I smoked as hard as I could, until I felt I was turning quite pale and
the perspiration was standing in great drops on my forehead. Then he
laughed--such a hearty laugh.

Manders. It was an extremely odd thing to do.

Mrs. Alving. Dear Mr. Manders, Oswald only dreamt it.

Oswald. No indeed, mother, it was no dream. Because--don't you
remember--you came into the room and carried me off to the nursery,
where I was sick, and I saw that you were crying. Did father often play
such tricks?

Manders. In his young days he was full of fun--

Oswald. And, for all that, he did so much with his life--so much that
was good and useful, I mean--short as his life was.

Manders. Yes, my dear Oswald Alving, you have inherited the name of a
man who undoubtedly was both energetic and worthy. Let us hope it will
be a spur to your energies.

Oswald. It ought to be, certainly.

Manders. In any case it was nice of you to come home for the day that
is to honour his memory.

Oswald. I could do no less for my father.

Mrs. Alving. And to let me keep him so long here--that's the nicest
part of what he has done.

Manders. Yes, I hear you are going to spend the winter at home.

Oswald. I am here for an indefinite time, Mr. Manders.--Oh, it's good
to be at home again!

Mrs. Alving (beaming). Yes, isn't it?

Manders (looking sympathetically at him). You went out into the world
very young, my dear Oswald.

Oswald. I did. Sometimes I wonder if I wasn't too young.

Mrs. Alving. Not a bit of it. It is the best thing for an active boy,
and especially for an only child. It's a pity when they are kept at
home with their parents and get spoiled.

Manders. That is a very debatable question, Mrs. Alving. A child's own
home is, and always must be, his proper place.

Oswald. There I agree entirely with Mr. Manders.

Manders. Take the case of your own son. Oh yes, we can talk about it
before him. What has the result been in his case? He is six or seven
and twenty, and has never yet had the opportunity of learning what a
well-regulated home means.

Oswald. Excuse me, Mr. Manders, you are quite wrong there.

Manders. Indeed? I imagined that your life abroad had practically been
spent entirely in artistic circles.

Oswald. So it has.

Manders. And chiefly amongst the younger artists.

Oswald. Certainly.

Manders. But I imagined that those gentry, as a rule, had not the means
necessary for family life and the support of a home.

Oswald. There are a considerable number of them who have not the means
to marry, Mr. Manders.

Manders. That is exactly my point.

Oswald. But they can have a home of their own, all the same; a good
many of them have. And they are very well-regulated and very
comfortable homes, too.

(MRS. ALVING, who has listened to him attentively, nods assent, but
says nothing.)

Manders. Oh, but I am not talking of bachelor establishments. By a home
I mean family life--the life a man lives with his wife and children.

Oswald. Exactly, or with his children and his children's mother.

Manders (starts and clasps his hands). Good heavens!

Oswald. What is the matter?
